---
title: macOS YubiKey Setup
excerpt: How to use a YubiKey with SSH and GPG on macOS Ventura
tags: setup
---

I use a YubiKey on my personal devices to store my SSH and GPG keys.
In theory this is for security reasons, but in practice I think this was just for fun.

Anyway, getting this set up on my MacBook hit way more issues than I anticipated, so I put together this post collecting everything I had to do.
I'll be assuming that you are using [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/), but note that this was done on an Intel MacBook so paths are likely different for Apple Silicon.

## SSH

### Creating *_sk Keys

SSH supports creating security-key-hosted `*_sk` keys, which are required if you want your SSH keys on your YubiKey.
Currently, these are `id_ecdsa_sk` and `id_ed25519_sk`.

See Yubico's page on [Securing SSH with FIDO2](https://developers.yubico.com/SSH/Securing_SSH_with_FIDO2.html) for details on creating `*_sk` SSH keys on your YubiKey.

### Using *_sk Keys

The built-in `ssh` on Ventura has support for `*_sk` keys removed for whatever reason.
You'll need to install `openssh` from Homebrew to get support:

```shell
brew install openssh
```

This loses Apple's Keychain integration, but as I don't use that feature anyway this isn't a loss.

Next, you'll need to download the configuration file in Lorenz Bauer's [GitHub Gist](https://gist.github.com/lmb/e4448973daf99f0cc4a182a4e1811f93).
This let's us use Homebrew's `ssh-agent` instead of the built-in version lacking `*_sk` support.
Place this file at `Library/LaunchAgents/homebrew.com.openssh.ssh-agent.plist` and run:

```shell
launchctl load Library/LaunchAgents/homebrew.com.openssh.ssh-agent.plist
```

Without this, attempts to add keys to the `ssh-agent` (e.g. `ssh-add`) will start the built-in `ssh-agent` and fail.

### Forwarding SSH Keys

If your remote machine only has an `*_sk` type SSH key, you'll need to forward your local keys for SSH operations (e.g. pushing `git` commits) as you can't touch the remote YubiKey for validation.
To do so, you'll want to make the following changes to `~/.ssh/config`:

```
AddKeysToAgent yes

Host server_name
  ForwardAgent yes
```

`AddKeysToAgent` automatically adds keys to your agent on use, while `ForwardAgent` makes your local keys available on the remote machine `server_name`.
I've put `ForwardAgent` under a `Host` because it's not a great idea to be forwarding all of my keys by default.
See the `ssh_config` [man page](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/ssh_config.5.html) for more details on these options.

You can use `ssh-add -L` while connected to the remote machine to confirm your local keys are available.

### Visual Studio Code

VSCode grabs the built-in `ssh` by default, but that can be fixed with a change to your `settings.json`:

```json
{
  "remote.SSH.path": "/usr/local/bin/ssh",
}
```

## GPG

### Adding a GPG Key to YubiKey

You'll need to install `gnupg` from Homebrew:

```shell
brew install gnupg
```

See Yubico's article [Using Your YubiKey with OpenPGP](https://support.yubico.com/hc/en-us/articles/360013790259-Using-Your-YubiKey-with-OpenPGP) for details on how to create GPG keys and then add them to your YubiKey.

### pinentry

In order to use a GPG key on a YubiKey, you'll have to enter a PIN.
By default, GPG was not configured correctly to ask for a PIN; instead, I would hit an IO error when GPG failed to show the PIN prompt.
I found the easiest fix to be configuring `gpg-agent` to use `pinentry-mac`, which can be installed with:

```shell
brew install pinentry-mac
```

This can then be activated by adding the following to `~/.gnupu/gpg-agent.conf`:

```
pinentry-program /usr/local/bin/pinentry-mac
```

and running:

```shell
gpg-connect-agent reloadagent /bye
```

There are other versions of `pinentry` which can be configured based on preference (e.g. `pinentry-curses` or `pinentry-tty`).

### Signing Git Commits

If you want to sign your `git` commits (and get the nice "Verified" label on GitHub), you just need to add the following to your `~/.config/git/config` (or `~/.gitconfig`):

```ini
[commit]
  gpgsign = true
[user]
  signingkey = PUBLIC_KEY
```

See the [`git` manual](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Signing-Your-Work) for more details.

## Oh My Zsh

Oh My Zsh includes plugins to start both `ssh-agent` and `gpg-agent`, which you can add in your `~/.zshrc`:

```shell
plugins=(
        ...
)

# Assuming macOS is my laptop
# Need ssh-agent on client and gpg-agent on server
if [[ "$(uname)" == "Darwin" ]]; then
    plugins+=(ssh-agent)
else
    plugins+=(gpg-agent)
fi
```

See the [ssh-agent README](https://github.com/ohmyzsh/ohmyzsh/tree/master/plugins/ssh-agent) for more details on options.

*Note that if the `ssh-agent` plugin is active on your remote machine it will override your forwarded keys!*